1。GENDER OF NOUNS
Many nouns that denote living things have both a masculine and a feminine form.
Most nouns that end in -o are masculine.
Most nouns that end in -a are feminine.
Masculine nouns that end in a consonant often have a corresponding feminine form that ends in -a.
Some nouns that refer to people use the same form for both masculine and feminine. These nouns indicate gender by the article (el or la).
Nouns that end in -sión, -ción, -dad, -tad, -tud, -umbre are feminine.
Many nouns that end in -ma are masculine.
A few nouns that end in -o are feminine
Remember, whenever you learn a new noun, learn it complete with its definite article (el, la). Definite articles are the subject of an upcoming lesson.

2。CARDINAL NUMBERS: 1-10
1. uno
2. dos
3. tres
4. cuatro
5. cinco
6. seis
7. siete
8. ocho
9. nueve
10. diez

3。PLURAL FORMS OF NOUNS
(a)The definite articles (el, la) also change in the plural form. They become “los” and “las.” The definite articles will be covered in depth in the next lesson.
el libro: los libros
la pluma: las plumas
el chico: los chicos
la señora: las señoras

(b)If a noun ends in a consonant, make it plural by adding -es.
el borrador: los borradores (borrador + es)
la universidad: las universidades (universidad + es)
el profesor: los profesores (profesor + es)
la ciudad: las ciudades (ciudad + es)

(c)If a noun ends in -ión, add -es and drop the written accent.
el avión: los aviones
la conversación: las conversaciones
la sección: las secciones
la televisión: las televisiones

(d)If a noun ends in -z, add -es and change the z to c.
el lápiz: los lápices
la voz: las voces
el tapiz: los tapices
la actriz: las actrices

(e)When the plural refers to two or more nouns of different genders, the masculine plural is used.
2 perros + 6 perras = 8 perros (not perras)
1 gato + 8 gatas = 9 gatos (not gatas)

(f)A few nouns are “compound nouns,” that is, they are formed by combining two words into one.
These compound nouns are always masculine, and the plural is formed by changing the “el” to “los.”
el abrelatas los abrelatas
el paraguas  los paraguas

SUMMARY:
If a noun ends in a vowel, simply add -s.
If a noun ends in a consonant, simply add -es.
If a noun ends in a -z, change the z to c before adding -es.
If a noun ends in ión, drop the written accent before adding -es.
If the plural refers to a mixed group, use the masculine.
For compound nouns, change “el” to “los”.

4.THE VERB FORM "HAY"
hay
there is, there are

5.SUBJECT PRONOUNS
nosotros we (masculine or mixed gender)
nosotras we (feminine)
vosotros you-all (familiar, Spain, masculine or mixed gender)
vosotras you-all (familiar, Spain, feminine)
ellos they (masculine or mixed gender)
ellas they (feminine)
ustedes you-all (formal in Spain, formal and familiar in Latin America)

6.REGULAR SPANISH VERBS
If the subject is I (yo), conjugate by dropping the ending and add -o.
yo hablo (hablar – ar + o = hablo)
yo como (comer – er + o = como)
yo vivo (vivir – ir + o = vivo)

If the subject is you formal (usted) drop the ending and add either -a or -e. If the verb is an -ar verb, add -a. If it is an -er or -ir verb, add -e.
usted habla (hablar – ar + a = habla)
usted come (comer – er + e = come)
usted vive (vivir – ir + e = vive)

Notice that the ending of the infinitive determines which is used: -ar verbs add -amos, -er verbs add -emos, -ir verbs add -imos.
nosotros/as hablamos (hablar – ar + amos = hablamos)
nosotros/as comemos(comer – er + emos = comemos)
nosotros/as vivimos(vivir – ir + imos = vivimos)

If the subject is you-all (ustedes), conjugate by dropping the ending and add -an or -en. If the verb is an -ar verb, add -an. If it is an -er or an -ir verb, add -en.
ustedes hablan(hablar – ar + an = hablan)
ustedes comen(comer – er + en = comen)
ustedes viven(vivir – ir + en = viven)


7.REGULAR VERBS: PART II
8.REGULAR VERBS: PART III
COMMON REGULAR -AR VERBS
alquilar – to rent
entrar (en) – to enter (into)
necesitar – to need
amar – to love
enviar – to send
olvidar – to forget
andar – to walk
escuchar – to listen to
pagar – to pay for
ayudar – to help
esperar – to hope, to wait for
practicar – to practice
bailar – to dance
estudiar – to study
preguntar – to ask
buscar – to look for
firmar – to sign
preparar – to prepare
caminar – to walk
ganar – to win, earn
regresar – to return
cantar – to sing
gastar – to spend money
saludar – to greet
cocinar – to cook
hablar – to speak, to talk
tocar – to touch, to play an instrument
comprar – to buy
lavar – to wash
tomar – to take, to drink
contestar – to answer
llegar – to arrive
trabajar – to work
dejar – to allow, to leave
llevar – to wear, to carry
viajar – to travel
desear – to desire
mandar – to order
visitar – to visit
enseñar – to teach
mirar – to watch, to look at

COMMON REGULAR -ER VERBS
aprender – to learn
creer – to believe
poseer – to possess, to own
beber – to drink
deber – to have to, to owe
prometer – to promise
comer – to eat
esconder – to hide
romper – to break
comprender – to understand
leer – to read
temer – to fear
correr – to run
meter en – to put into
vender – to sell

COMMON REGULAR -IR VERBS
abrir – to open
descubrir – to discover
permitir – to permit
admitir – to admit
discutir – to discuss
recibir – to receive
asistir a – to attend
escribir – to write
subir – to climb, to go up
cubrir – to cover
existir – to exist
sufrir – to suffer
decidir – to decide
omitir – to omit
unir – to unite
describir – to describe
partir – to divide
vivir – to live

9.SPANISH ADJECTIVES
Adjectives that end in -o have four forms: alto, alta, altos, altas
Adjectives that end in -e have two forms: inteligente, inteligentes
Most adjectives that end in a consonant have two forms: popular, populares (form plural by adding -es)

10.ADJECTIVES: PART II
Many adjectives of nationality end in -o. These adjectives follow the same rules as other adjectives ending in -o. That is, they have four forms.
el muchacho mexicano
la muchacha mexicana
los muchachos mexicanos
las muchachas mexicanas

Many other adjectives of nationality end in a consonant.
These adjectives do not follow the same rules as other adjectives ending in a consonant, rather,
they have a distinct feminine form ending in -a.
el muchacho español
la muchacha española
los muchachos españoles
las muchachas españolas

There is another group of adjectives that does not follow the normal rules. Adjectives ending in -or, -án, -ón, or -ín also have a feminine form.
el chico hablador
la chica habladora

los chicos habladores
las chicas habladoras

el hombre trabajador
la mujer trabajadora

los hombres trabajadores
las mujeres trabajadoras

Adjectives ending in “-erior” do not have a feminine form.
Adjectives that are descriptive usually follow the noun they describe.
el chico alto
la chica alta
los libros pequeños
las plumas rojas

Adjectives of quantity almost always come before the noun. Such adjectives tell how much or how many.
pocos libros
mucha energía
mucho trabajo
pocas casas

Sometimes, a descriptive adjective can precede the noun. If the adjective is descriptive, but speaks of a quality that is inherent and usually taken for granted, the adjective comes first.
la blanca nieve
the white snow (snow is inherently white)
los altos picos
the tall peaks (peaks are inherently tall)

Adjectives that end in -o have four forms.
Adjectives of nationality ending in -o are no different from other such adjectives.
Adjectives that end in -e have two forms.
Most adjectives ending with a consonant have two forms.
Adjectives of nationality ending in a consonant have four forms.
Adjectives ending in -or, -án, -ón, or -ín have four forms.
When an adjective speaks of a quality that is inherent and usually taken for granted, the adjective precedes the noun.
Adjectives of quantity usually come before the noun.

11.DAYS OF THE WEEK
lunes  Monday
martes  Tuesday
miércoles  Wednesday
jueves  Thursday
viernes  Friday
sábado  Saturday
domingo  Sunday

12.CARDINAL NUMBERS 11-30
1. uno              11. once                21. veintiuno
2. dos              12. doce                22. veintidós
3. tres             13. trece               23. veintitrés
4. cuatro           14. catorce             24. veinticuatro
5. cinco            15. quince              25. veinticinco
6. seis             16. dieciséis           26. veintiséis
7. siete            17. diecisiete          27. veintisiete
8. ocho             18. dieciocho           28. veintiocho
9. nueve            19. diecinueve          29. veintinueve
10. diez            20. veinte              30. treinta

13.SER AND ESTAR
La manzana está verde. (condition: verde = unripe)
La manzana es verde.   (essential characteristic: verde = color green)

ser (to be)             estar (to be)
soy                     estoy
eres                    estás
es                      está
somos                   estamos
sois                    estáis
son                     están

Ser is used to express the hour, day, and date.
¿Qué hora es? What time is it?
Son las dos. It’s two o’clock.

Ser is used to express place of origin.
¿De dónde eres tú?Where are you from?
Soy de Colombia.I’m from Colombia.

Ser is used to express occupation.
¿Cuál es tu trabajo?What do you do?
Soy carpinteroI’m a carpenter.

Ser is used to express nationality.
¿Es ella puertorriqueña?Is she Puerto Rican?
No, es guatemalteca.No, she’s Guatemalan.

Ser is used to express religious or political affiliation.
¿Es el gobierno socialista?Is the government socialist?
No, es comunista.No, it’s communist.

Ser is used to express the material something is made of.
¿De qué material es la mesa?What’s the table made of?
Es de madera.It’s made of wood.

Ser is used to express possession.
¿De quién es la pluma?Whose pen is it?
Es de Emilio.It’s Emilio’s.

Ser is used to express the relationship of one person to another.
¿Quién es Rogelio?Who is Roger?
Es el esposo de Marta.He’s Martha’s husband.

Ser is used with certain impersonal expressions.
Es importante practicar cada día.It’s important to practice every day.
Es necesario hablar mucho.It’s necessary to speak a lot.

Ser is used to tell where an event is taking place.
La película es en el cine.The movie is at the theatre.
La fiesta es en el club Fantástico.The party is in the Fantastic Club.

Ser is used with adjectives to express inherent, or essential qualities.
Miguel es un hombre sincero.Mike is a sincere man.
También es guapo.He’s also handsome.

Let’s review. Ser is used to express:
the hour, day, and date
place of origin
occupation
nationality
religious or political affiliation
the material something is made of
possession
relationship of one person to another
certain impersonal expressions
where an event is taking place
essential qualities

Estar is used to express geographic or physical locations.
¿Dónde estás?Where are you?
Estoy en el laboratorio.I’m in the laboratory.

Estar is used with adjectives to express a state or condition (“how” something is).
¿Cómo está la sopa? How’s the soup?
La sopa está fría.The soup is cold.

Estar is used with many idiomatic expressions. These are just a few.
estar de acuerdo.to be in agreement
estar de pie. to be standing
estar en camino. to be on the way
estar en las nubes. to daydream

Estar is used with the progressive tenses. You will learn more about this usage later. We present it now simply because it is an important use of the verb estar.
¿Qué estás comiendo? What are you eating?
Estoy comiendo arroz y frijoles.I am eating rice and beans.

Let’s review. Estar is used to express:
geographic or physical location
state or condition
many idiomatic expressions
progressive tenses

When a noun follows the verb, use ser
When an adjective follows the verb, decide between “essence” and “condition”
To tell where something is from, use ser
To tell where something is located right now, use estar
To tell where an event is taking place, use ser

14.NEGATION
Study the following list of affirmative words and their negative counterparts:
algo (something) nada (nothing)
alguien (somebody) nadie (nobody)
algún (-o, -a, -os, -as) (some, something) ningún (-o, -a, -os, -as) (no, none)
siempre (always) nunca (never) jamás (never, ever)
también (also) tampoco (neither, not either)
o . . . o (either . . . or) ni . . . ni (neither . . . nor)

15.QUESTIONS

16.POSSESSIVE ADJECTIVES
mi(mis)(my),tu(tus)(your),su(sus),nuestro,vuestro
Su has four meanings: his, her, their and your (formal).

Two possessive adjectives (nuestro and vuestro) have four forms.
(our)nuestro,nuestra,nuestros,nuestras
(your)vuestro,vuestra,vuestros,vuestras,

17.IRREGULAR VERBS: TENER AND VENIR
tener  to have
venir  to come

tengo / vengo
tienes / vienes
tiene / viene
tenemos / venimos
tenéis / venís
tienen / vienen

18.TENER QUE, HAY QUE
María tiene un examen el lunes. Ella tiene que estudiar.
María has a test on Monday. She has to study.

No es fácil aprender el español. Hay que practicar mucho.
It isn’t easy to learn Spanish. It is necessary to practice a lot.

19.IDIOMATIC EXPRESSIONS WITH "TENER"
Idiom: Hace mucho frío
Literally: It makes much cold
True Meaning: It is very cold

Because the expressions with tener use nouns, they are modified with adjectives, not adverbs.
Tengo frío.
Tengo mucho frío. (not muy)

20.WEATHER EXPRESSIONS

21.THE PERSONAL "A"
Jorge llama a María. Jorge calls María.

In Spanish, when the direct object is a person, it is preceded by the preposition “a.” This word has no English translation.

The personal “a” may also be used if the direct object is a domesticated animal, especially a pet, provided that the speaker attaches some sort of personal feelings towards the animal.
La mujer acaricia a su perro. (acariciar)The woman pets her dog.
El perro persigue a la gata. (perseguir)The dog chases the cat.

The personal “a” is not used when the direct object is not a person or is an animal for which no personal feelings are felt.
Bebo la leche. (beber)I drink the milk. — milk is neither a person nor an animal
Miro la jirafa. (mirar)I look at the giraffe. — no personal feelings are felt towards the giraffe

The personal “a” is not used after the verb tener, or the verb form hay. This is true even if the direct object is a person.
Tengo dos hermanos. (tener)I have two brothers.
Hay cinco chicas. There are five girls.

22.CONTRACTIONS
When a or de precedes the definite article el, the two words combine to form a contraction. That is, two words become one.
a + el = al
de + el = del
A + el is always contracted.
Incorrect:¿Llevas a el hermano de Raúl?
Correct:¿Llevas al hermano de Raúl?

De + el is always contracted.
Incorrect:¿El libro es de el profesor?
Correct:¿El libro es del profesor?

23.STEM-CHANGING VERBS: O-UE
Here is a list of common o:ue stem-changing verbs.
almorzar to eat lunch
morir to die
aprobar to approve
mostrar to show
colgar to hang
mover to move (an object)
contar to count, to tell
probar to prove, test, sample, taste
costar to cost
recordar to remember
devolver to return (an object)
resolver to solve
volver to return (from someplace)
rogar to beg, pray
dormir to sleep
sonar to sound, ring
encontrar to find
soñar (con) to dream (about)
envolver to wrap
tostar to toast
morder to bite
volar to fly

o:ue stem-changers (dormir)
duermo,duermes,duerme,dormimos,dormís,duermen

24.STEM-CHANGING VERBS: E-IE
acertar to guess, get right
encender to light, kindle
advertir to advise, warn
entender to understand
cerrar to close, shut
fregar to scrub, wash dishes
comenzar to begin
hervir to boil
confesar to confess
mentir to lie
consentir to consent
negar to deny
convertir to convert
pensar (en) to think about
defender to defend
perder to lose
empezar to begin
preferir to prefer

e:ie stem-changers (cerrar)
cierro,cierras,cierra,cerramos,cerráis,cierran

25.STEM-CHANGING VERBS: E-I
bendecir (*) to bless
impedir to impede
colegir to deduce
maldecir (*) to curse
competir to compete
medir to measure
conseguir to get, obtain
pedir to ask for, to order
corregir to correct
perseguir to pursue, to persecute
decir (*) to say, tell
reír to laugh
despedir to dismiss, fire
repetir to repeat
elegir to elect
seguir to follow, continue
freír to fry
servir to serve
gemir to groan, moan
sonreír to smile

e:i stem-changers (repetir)
repito,repites,repite,repetimos,repetís,repiten

26. Estar, Ir, Dar
estar(to be)	ir(to go)	dar(to give)
estoy	        voy	        doy
estás	        vas	        das
está	        va	        da
estamos	        vamos	    damos
estáis	        vais	    dais
están	        van	        dan

27.IR A + INFINITIVE
ir a + infinitive = to be going to do something (in the near future)
Voy a llevar a mi hermana a su casa.I am going to take my sister to her house.
Vas a invitar a muchas muchachas.You are going to invite lots of girls.
Cristina va a conversar con mi mamá.Christina is going to talk with my mom.
Eduardo va a leer el libro.Edward is going to read the book.

28.ACABAR DE + INFINITIVE
acabar de + infinitive = to have just done something (in the very recent past)
Acabo de llevar a mi hermana a su casa.I just took my sister to her house.
Acabas de invitar a muchas muchachas.You have just invited many girls.
Cristina acaba de conversar con mi mamá.Christina has just spoken with my mom.
Nosotros acabamos de leer el libro.We just read the book.
Vosotros acabáis de escribir unas cartas.You-all have just written some letters.
Ellos acaban de nadar en el mar.They have just swum in the ocean.

29.VOLVER A + INFINITIVE
volver a + infinitive = to do something again
Vuelvo a leer el libro.I read the book again.
Cristina vuelve a conversar con mi mamá.Christina speaks with my mom again.


30.ORDINAL NUMBERS
Like many other adjectives, the ordinal numbers have a masculine and a feminine form.
They also have a singular and plural form.
first primero primera primeros
third second segundo segunda segundos
tercero tercera terceros
fourth cuarto cuarta cuartos
fifth quinto quinta quintos
sixth sexto sexta sextos
seventh séptimo séptima séptimos
eighth octavo octava octavos
ninth noveno novena novenos
tenth décimo décima décimos
So, the ordinal numbers have four forms, just like other adjectives that end in -o.
primero,primeros,primera,primeras

31.MONTHS, SEASONS AND DATES
enero January
febrero February
marzo March
abril April
mayo May
junio June
julio July
agosto August
septiembre September
octubre October
noviembre November
diciembre December
To express “in a certain month,” use the preposition “en.”
Vamos a México en enero. We are going to Mexico in January.

Here are the four seasons.
la primavera spring
el verano summer
el otoño autumn
el invierno winter

En América del Norte, la primavera empieza en marzo.
In North America, spring begins in March.

En América del Sur, la primavera empieza en septiembre.
In South America, spring begins in September.

If you are talking about the first day of the month, use the expression “el primer día” or simply “el primero.”
¿Qué día es hoy?
Hoy es lunes, el primer día de mayo.
Hoy es lunes, el primero de mayo.
Today is Monday, May 1.

For all other days of the month, use the cardinal numbers.
¿Cuál es la fecha de hoy? (Tuesday, March 25)
Hoy es martes, el veinticinco de marzo.

¿A cuántos estamos hoy? (Sunday, June 3)
Estamos al domingo, el tres de junio.

32.COMPARISONS OF INEQUALITY
In Spanish, inequality is expressed by using one of the following formulae:
más (menos) + adjective + que
más (menos) + adverb + que
más (menos) + noun + que

Tú eres más alto que yo. You are taller than I.
Mónica habla más lentamente que Carmen.Monica speaks more slowly than Carmen.
Tengo menos libros que Arsenio.I have fewer books than Arsenio.

If the comparative is followed by a number, use de rather than que.
Hay menos de veinte alumnos en la clase.There are fewer than twenty students in the class.
Él tiene más de noventa años.He is more than ninety years old. (Literally: He has more than ninety years.)

Note that when the sentence is negative, que is used even with numbers, to convey the meaning “only.”
Tengo más de cinco dólares.(I have more than five dollars.)
but
No tengo más que cinco dólares.(I only have five dollars.)

Hay más de veinte estudiantes en la clase.(There are more than twenty students in the class.)
but
No hay más que veinte estudiantes en la clase.(There are only twenty students in the class.)

33.COMPARISONS OF EQUALITY
To form the comparisons of equality using adjectives or adverbs, use the following formula:
tan + adjective (adverb) + como
El libro es tan bueno como la película.(The book is as good as the movie.)
El chico es tan alto como la chica.(The boy is as tall as the girl.)

To form comparisons of equality with nouns, use the following formula:
tanto(-a,-os,-as) + noun + como
Juan tiene tanto dinero como María.(as much money as)
Él tiene tanta paciencia como ella.(as much patience as)
Tiene tantos libros como ella.(as many books as)
Tiene tantas plumas como ella.(as many pens as)

When actions (not things) are being compared, and there is no adjective, use the following formula:
verb + tanto + como
Sus estudiantes aprenden tanto como mis estudiantes.(learn as much as)
Rosario cocina tanto como Josefina.(cooks as much as)
Las naranjas cuestan tanto como las manzanas.(cost as much as)

When actions (not things) are being compared, and there is an adjective, use the following formula:
verb + tan + adjective (masculine form) + como
Aquí se trabaja tan duro como ahí.(work as hard as)
El niño juega tan poco como la niña.(plays as little as)
Ellos duermen tan poco como ella.(sleep as little as)


34.SUPERLATIVES
In Spanish, the relative superlative construction is similar to the comparative.
definite article + noun + más (menos) + adjective + de
Juan es el chico más inteligente de la clase.John is the smartest boy in the class.
Bill Gates es el hombre más rico de los EEUU.Bill Gates is the richest man in the U.S.

Just like in English, the noun can be omitted. All of the following are correct.
María es la chica más delgada de la clase.Mary is the thinnest girl in the class.
María es la más delgada de la clase.Mary is the thinnest in the class.

The absolute superlative for adjectives has three possible forms.
muy + adjective
sumamente + adjective
adjective + ísimo (-a, -os, -as)

muy guapovery handsome
sumamente guapoextremely handsome
guapísimoindescribably handsome

35.PRONOUNS AS OBJECTS OF PREPOSITIONS
You have already learned one set of pronouns, called the subject pronouns.
yo
tú
él, ella, usted

nosotros/as
vosotros/as

ellos, ellas, ustedes

Subject Pronouns	Obj. Prep. Pronouns
yo	                    mí
tú	                    ti
él	                    él
ella	                ella
usted	                usted
nosotros/as	            nosotros/as
vosotros/as	            vosotros/as
ellos/as	            ellos/as
ustedes	                ustedes

Juan habla de mí.Juan speaks of me.
Hablo con ellos.I speak with them.
Pablo compró un anillo para ella.Pablo bought a ring for her.

Whenever mí follows the preposition con, the two words combine to form conmigo.
¿Por qué no vienes conmigo? Why don’t you come with me?

Whenever ti follows the preposition con, the two words combine to form contigo.
No voy contigo, voy con ellos. I’m not going with you, I’m going with them.

Whenever you want to say “with him, with her, with you (formal), with them, with you-all (formal)” there are two possibilities.
If the pronoun is referring to the subject of the sentence, use consigo.
If the pronoun does not refer to the subject of the sentence, use con + the appropriate pronoun.

Pronoun does refer to the subject
He took the pens with him(self).Él llevó las plumas consigo.
Why don’t you take a book with you(rself)?¿Por qué no lleva un libro consigo?

Pronoun does not refer to the subject
They live with him.Ellos viven con él.
I don’t want to talk to you.No quiero hablar con usted.

There are six special prepositions that are followed by subject pronouns rather than object pronouns.
entre between
excepto except
incluso including
menos except
según according to
salvo except
Entre tú y yo, esta comida es horrible.
Todos beben agua, incluso yo.
Según tú, la chica es bonita.

41.DIRECT OBJECT PRONOUNS
In an affirmative statement with one verb, the direct object pronoun comes immediately before the conjugated verb.
Tengo = I have
Tengo la pluma. = I have the pen.
La tengo. = I have it.

Juan la tiene.
Juan tiene = John has
Juan tiene la pluma. = John has the pen.
Juan la tiene. = John has it.

Juan lo tiene.
Juan tiene = John has
Juan tiene el libro. = John has the book.
Juan lo tiene. = John has it.

I know you.Te conozco.
She loves him.Ella lo ama.
She loves me.Ella me ama.
Juan sees her.Juan la ve.
They call us.Ellos nos llaman.
We call them.Los llamamos.

42.DIRECT OBJECT PRONOUNS: PART II
Affirmative Sentence
I buy the books.Compro los libros.Los compro. (I buy them.)
Negative Sentence
I don’t buy the books.No compro los libros.No los compro. (I don’t buy them.)

Los compras.No los compras.
Guadalupe siempre lo estudia.Guadalupe nunca lo estudia.
Ellos nos conocen.Ellos no nos conocen.

43.DIRECT OBJECT PRONOUNS: PART III
When a sentence has two verbs, the first verb is conjugated and the second verb remains in the infinitive form.
poder.to be able
pagar.to pay
Puedo pagar diez pesos.I am able to pay 10 pesos.
preferir.to prefer
hablar.to speak
Elena prefiere hablar español.Elena prefers to speak Spanish.

In sentences with two verbs, there are two options regarding the placement of the direct object pronoun.
1.Place it immediately before the conjugated verb.
2.Attach it directly to the infinitive.

Here are examples of the direct object pronoun placed before the conjugated verb:
Lo quiero ver.I want to see it.
Lo debemos comprar.We should buy it.
María nos debe visitar.Mary should visit us.
Juan lo necesita lavar.John needs to wash it.

Here are examples of the direct object pronoun attached directly to the infinitive:
Quiero verlo.I want to see it.
Debemos comprarlo.We should buy it.
María debe visitarnos.Mary should visit us.
Juan necesita lavarlo.John needs to wash it.


44.INDIRECT OBJECT PRONOUNS: PART I
me (me)
te (you-familiar)
le (him, her, you-formal)

nos (us)
os (you-all-familiar)
les (them, you-all-formal)

In an affirmative statement with one verb, the indirect object pronoun comes immediately before the conjugated verb.
Juan me compra un regalo.John buys me a gift.John buys a gift for me.
Juan te compra un regalo.John buys you a gift.John buys a gift for you.
Juan le compra un regalo.John buys her a gift.John buys a gift for her.
Juan nos compra un regalo.John buys us a gift.John buys a gift for us.
Juan os compra un regalo.John buys you-all (familiar) a gift.John buys a gift for you-all.
Juan les compra un regalo.John buys them a gift.John buys a gift for them.

me compra=buys (for) me
te compra=buys (for) you
le compra=buys (for) her
nos compra=buys (for) us
os compra=buys (for) you-all
les compra=buys (for) them

le
to (for) him
to (for) her
to (for) you-formal

les
to (for) them
to (for) you-all-formal

Ella le escribe una carta.She writes him a letter.She writes her a letter.
Since le and les can mean more than one thing, a prepositional phrase is often added to remove the ambiguity.
Ella le escribe a Juan una carta.
Ella le escribe a su hermana una carta.
Ella le escribe a usted una carta.

There is no ambiguity in the following sentence. It can only mean one thing.
Juan me da el dinero.John gives me the money.

The addition of a prepositional phrase merely adds emphasis.
Juan me da a mí el dinero.John gives me the money.

Let’s sum up the important points of this lesson:
The IO tells us where the DO is going.
The IO answers the question “to whom” or “for whom.”
Sentences that have an IO usually also have a DO
Sometimes the DO is not stated, but rather is implied, or understood.
The IO pronouns are: me, te, le, nos, os, les.
Place the pronoun before the conjugated verb.
Think in phrases, do not translate word-for-word.
Le and les are ambiguous.
Prepositional phrases are often used for clarity and for emphasis.

45.INDIRECT OBJECT PRONOUNS: PART II
In a negative statement with one verb, the indirect object pronoun comes between the negative word and the conjugated verb.
Él no me compra nada.He doesn’t buy me anything.He doesn’t buy anything for me.
Ella no te trae el desayuno.She doesn’t bring you breakfast.She doesn’t bring breakfast for you.
No le mando a él la cuenta.I don’t send him the bill.I don’t send the bill to him.
Ellos no nos compran ningún regalo.They don’t buy us any gifts.They don’t buy any gifts for us.

Remember, don’t translate word-for-word. Instead, think in terms of phrases, or concepts. “Ellos no nos compran ningún regalo” contains 3 concepts:
ellos nos compran (they buy us)
regalo (gift)
no, ningún (make the sentence negative)

no me compra.he doesn’t buy (for) me
no me compras.you don’t buy (for) me


46.INDIRECT OBJECT PRONOUNS: PART III
In sentences with two verbs, there are two options regarding the placement of the indirect object pronoun.
1.Place it immediately before the conjugated verb
2.Attach it directly to the infinitive

Here are examples of the indirect object pronoun placed before the conjugated verb:
Me necesitas dar un regalo.You need to give me a gift.(Necesitas darme un regalo.)
Te necesito comprar un sombrero.I need to buy you a hat.(Necesito comprarte un sombrero.)
Juan nos debe prestar el dinero.Juan must lend us the money.(Juan debe prestarnos el dinero.)
María le quiere alquilar a Juan el apartamento.María wants to rent the apartment to Juan.(María quiere alquilarle a Juan el apartamento.)


47.DO and IO Pronouns Together
Here are the direct object pronouns and the indirect object pronouns side by side:
DO Pronouns	    IO Pronouns	    English Equivalent
me	            me	            me
te	            te	            you (familiar)
lo, la	        le	            him, her, it, you (formal)
nos	            nos	            us
os	            os	            you-all (familiar)
los, las	    les	            them, you-all (formal)

When you have both a direct object pronoun and an indirect object pronoun in the same sentence, the indirect object pronoun comes first.
Ellos me los dan.They give them to me.
IO pronoun: me DO pronoun: los

Ella te la vende.She sells it to you.
IO pronoun: te DO pronoun: la

Whenever both pronouns begin with the letter “l” change the first pronoun to “se.”
le lo = se lo
le la = se la
le los = se los
le las = se las
les lo = se lo
les la = se la
les los = se los
les las = se las

Because the pronoun se can have so many meanings, it is often helpful to clarify it by using a prepositional phrase.
Él se lo dice.Ambiguous. He tells it to (whom?).
Él se lo dice a Juan.He tells it to him. (to Juan)
Él se lo dice a María.He tells it to her. (to María)
Él se lo dice a ella.He tells it to her.

In sentences with two verbs, there are two options regarding the placement of the pronouns. Place them immediately before the conjugated verb or attach them directly to the infinitive.
She should explain it to me.Ella me lo debe explicar.Ella debe explicármelo.
I want to tell it to you.Te lo quiero decir.Quiero decírtelo.
You need to send it to them.Se la necesitas enviar a ellos.Necesitas enviársela a ellos.


48.VERBS LIKE GUSTAR
Me gustan los libros.
Literal Translation: To me are pleasing the books.
Actual Translation: I like the books.

Singular Subject	Plural Subject
Me gusta la casa.	Me gustan las casas.
Te gusta el cuarto.	Te gustan los cuartos.
Le gusta la silla.	Le gustan las sillas.
Nos gusta el hotel.	Nos gustan los hoteles.
Os gusta la comida.	Os gustan las comidas.
Les gusta el reloj.	Les gustan los relojes.

Look more closely at one example:
Le gusta la silla.
It is impossible to tell whether this means:
He likes the chair.
She likes the chair.
You (usted) like the chair.

For purposes of clarification, the sentence will often begin with a prepositional phrase that clarifies just who the IO pronoun refers to.
A él le gusta la silla.He likes the chair.
A Juan le gusta la silla.John likes the chair.
A ella le gusta la silla.She likes the chair.
A María le gusta la silla.Mary likes the chair.
A usted le gusta la silla.You (formal) like the chair.

Now that you know how to correctly use the verb gustar, here is a list of verbs that operate in the same manner:
aburrir to bore
fascinar to be fascinating to
bastar to be sufficient
importar to be important to
caer bien (mal) to (not) suit
interesar to be interesting to
dar asco to be loathsome
molestar to be a bother
disgustar to hate something
parecer to appear to be
doler (o:ue) to be painful
picar to itch
encantar to “love” something
quedar to be left over, remain
faltar to be lacking something
volver (o:ue) loco to be crazy about

49.PRESENT PROGRESSIVE
To form the present progressive in Spanish, combine a form of “estar” with the present participle.
Estoy hablando.I am speaking.
Juan está comiendo.John is eating.
María está escribiendo una carta.Mary is writing a letter.

In order to form the present progressive, you must know how to conjugate the verb estar, and how to form the present participle. You already know how to conjugate the verb estar:
estar
estoy,estás,está,estamos,estáis,están

To form the present participle of regular -ar verbs, add -ando to the stem of the verb.
hablar: hablando(hablar – ar + ando)
trabajar: trabajando(trabajar – ar + ando)
estudiar: estudiando(estudiar – ar + ando)
To form the present participle of regular -er and -ir verbs, add -iendo to the stem of the verb.
comer: comiendo(comer – er + iendo)
hacer: haciendo(hacer – er + iendo)
vivir: viviendo(vivir – ir + iendo)
escribir: escribiendo(escribir – ir + iendo)

To form the present participle of -ir stem changing verbs, change e:i and o:u in the stem, and then add -iendo to the stem of the verb.
servir: sirviendo
pedir: pidiendo
decir: diciendo

dormir: durmiendo
morir: muriendo
poder: pudiendo

Sometimes when forming the present participle it is necessary to change the spelling of a word so that it agrees with the way it is pronounced.
 We call this an “orthographic” change. Here are some common examples:
caer: cayendo
creer: creyendo
huir: huyendo
ir: yendo
influir: influyendo
oír: oyendo
traer: trayendo
leer: leyendo
seguir: siguiendo

The following examples illustrate the rules for forming the present participle.
hablar: hablando (-ar)
comer: comiendo (-er)
vivir: viviendo (-ir)
decir: diciendo (e:i)
dormir: durmiendo (o:u)
leer: leyendo (orthographic)
seguir: siguiendo (orthographic)

To form the present progressive, simply conjugate the verb estar to agree with the subject of the sentence, and follow it with the present participle.
Juan está comiendo pan.John is eating bread.
María y Carmen están hablando con nosotros.Mary and Carmen are speaking with us.


50.VERBS WITH IRREGULAR FIRST PERSONS
The following verbs have irregular forms for the first person singular of the present tense:
caber (to fit) yo quepo
caer (to fall) yo caigo
conducir (to drive) yo conduzco
conocer (to know, to be acquainted with) yo conozco
escoger (to choose) yo escojo
dirigir (to direct) yo dirijo
hacer (to do, to make) yo hago
poner (to put, to place) yo pongo
saber (to know something – a fact) yo sé
salir (to leave) yo salgo
seguir (to follow)yo sigo
traer (to bring) yo traigo
valer (to be worth) yo valgo
ver (to see) yo veo

1. For verbs that end in -cer and -cir, change the c to zc for the yo form:
conocer (to know) yo conozco
conducir (to drive) yo conduzco
crecer (to grow) yo crezco
traducir (to translate) yo traduzco
establecer (to establish) yo establezco
producir (to produce) yo produzco

2. For verbs that end in -ger and -gir, change the g to j for the yo form:
escoger (to choose) yo escojo
dirigir (to direct)yo dirijo
emerger (to emerge)yo emerjo
fingir (to pretend)yo finjo

3. For verbs that end in -guir, change the gu to g for the yo form:
seguir (to follow) yo sigo
conseguir (to get) yo consigo
distinguir (to distinguish) yo distingo

51.SABER VS CONOCER / PEDIR VS. PREGUNTAR
To express knowledge or ignorance of a fact or information about something, use “saber.”
Juan sabe dónde está María.Juan knows where Maria is.
Yo no sé tu número de teléfono.I don’t know your telephone number.

To say that one is or is not acquainted with a person, a place, or an object, use conocer.
Yo no conozco a María.I don’t know (am not acquainted with) Maria.
Alberto y Alfredo conocen Madrid.Alberto and Alfredo know (are acquainted with) Madrid.

saber
to know a fact, to know something thoroughly, to know how to do something
conocer
to be acquainted with a person, place, or thing

pedir
to ask for, or request an object, service or favor
Pido más carne.I ask for more meat.
Pedimos ahora.We order now (ask for service).

preguntar
to ask a question, or request information
Pregunto qué hora es.I ask what time it is.
Preguntamos a qué hora sirven la cena.We ask what time they serve dinner.

Saber vs Conocer
saber: to know (facts, information, how to do something, something by heart)
conocer: to know (to be familiar with people, places, things)

Pedir vs Preguntar
pedir: to ask (for an object or a service)
preguntar: to ask (a question, request information)


52.CARDINAL NUMBERS 31-1000
10. diez
20. veinte
30. treinta
40. cuarenta
50. cincuenta
60. sesenta
70. setenta
80. ochenta
90. noventa
100. cien
Now, see how easy it is to fill in the gaps:
31. treinta y uno
32. treinta y dos
33. treinta y tres
34. treinta y cuatro
35. treinta y cinco
36. treinta y seis
37. treinta y siete
38. treinta y ocho
39. treinta y nueve
40. cuarenta
41. cuarenta y uno
42. cuarenta y dos
etc.
This pattern continues all the way to 100:
53. cincuenta y tres
54. cincuenta y cuatro
65. sesenta y cinco
66. sesenta y seis
78. setenta y ocho
88. ochenta y ocho
99. noventa y nueve
etc.
From 101-199, use “ciento”:
ciento uno
ciento dos
ciento tres
ciento sesenta y uno
ciento sesenta y dos
etc.

Notice that “y” is used only in numbers 31-99 (and 131-199, 231-299, 331-399, etc.) and it is not used to separate hundreds from tens.
Correct:ciento ochenta y nueve
Incorrect:ciento y ochenta y nueve

To get to 1000, all of the rules you have learned so far continue to apply. All you need to do now is learn to count by 100s all the way to 1000, and that is quite easy:
100. cien
200. doscientos
300. trescientos
400. cuatrocientos
500. quinientos
600. seiscientos
700. setecientos
800. ochocientos
900. novecientos
1000. mil
Here are some more examples:
142. ciento cuarenta y dos
375. trescientos setenta y cinco
612. seiscientos doce
907. novecientos siete
999. novecientos noventa y nueve
Remember from an earlier lesson, there is a masculine and a feminine form for the number one:
un libro,one book
una pluma,one pen
This is also true for the numbers 200, 300, 400, etc.
doscientos libros,doscientas plumas
When there is exactly 100 of something, and the number is used with the noun, use the shortened form “cien.”
cien dólares,cien gatas,cien perros,cien pesetas
Finally, in Spanish a period is used to indicate thousands, and a comma is used as a decimal point.
English
1,543.67
Spanish
1.543,67

53.TELLING TIME
The verb ser is used to express the time of day. Use es when referring to “one o’clock” and use son when referring to all other hours.
Es la una.It’s one o’clock.
Son las dos.It’s two o’clock.

Minutes can be added to the hour using the word y (and).
Es la una y cinco.It’s five minutes past one.
Son las tres y doce.It’s twelve minutes past three.

Minutes can be subtracted from the hour using the word menos (less).
Es la una menos cinco.It’s five minutes till one.
Son las tres menos doce.It’s twelve minutes till three.

You can also use the words media (half) and cuarto (quarter).
Es la una y media.It’s half past one.
Son las tres menos cuarto.It’s quarter till three.

To say something occurs at a specific time, use the formula a + la(s) + time.
La fiesta empieza a las nueve.The party begins at nine o’clock.
El banco abre a las ocho y media.The bank opens at half past eight.

To differentiate between a.m. and p.m. use the expressions de la mañana, de la tarde and de la noche.
Son las dos de la tarde.It’s two in the afternoon.
Son las dos de la mañana.It’s two in the morning.
Son las diez de la noche.It’s ten in the evening.
When no specific time is mentioned, use the expressions por la mañana, por la tarde, por la noche.
Siempre leo el periódico por las mañanas.I always read the newspaper in the morning.

Here are a number of useful time expressions:
por la mañana, in the morning (no specific time)
de la mañana, in the morning (specific time)
por la tarde,in the afternoon (no specific time)
de la tarde,in the afternoon (specific time)
por la noche,in the evening or night (no specific time)
de la noche,in the evening or night (specific time)
la mañana,morning
el mañana,morrow, future
mañana por la mañana,tomorrow morning
pasado mañana,the day after tomorrow
ayer,yesterday
anoche,last night
la noche anterior, anteanoche,the night before last
el lunes que viene,next Monday
la semana que viene,next week
el año que viene,next year
el lunes pasado,last Monday
la semana pasada,last week
el año pasado,last year
al mediodía,at noon
a la medianoche,at midnight
alrededor de,around
de día,days
durante el día,during the day
a tiempo,on time
en punto,exactly, on-the-dot
tarde,late
temprano,early

54.POR AND PARA
“Por” and “para” have a variety of meanings, and they are often confused because they can each be translated as “for.”
Gracias por la información.Thanks for the information.
Este regalo es para Juan.This gift is for Juan.
To learn to use “por” and “para” correctly, you need to do two things:
1.Learn the rules for how por and para are used.
2.Memorize model sentences.

“Por” has many uses, and so it is the more problematic of the two.
Rule: to express gratitude or apology
Model: Gracias por la ayuda. (Thanks for the help.)

Rule: for multiplication and division
Model: Dos por dos son cuatro.(Two times two equals four.)

Rule: for velocity, frequency and proportion
Model: Voy al restaurante cinco veces por semana.(I go to the restaurant five times per week.)

Rule: meaning “through,” “along,” “by” or “in the area of”
Model: Andamos por el parque.(We walk through the park.)

Rule: when talking about exchange, including sales
Model: Él me dio diez dólares por el libro.(He gave me ten dollars for the book.)

Rule: to mean “on behalf of,” or “in favor of,”
Model: No voté por nadie.(I didn’t vote for anyone.)

Rule: to express a length of time
Model: Yo estudié por dos horas.(I studied for two hours.)

Rule: to express an undetermined, or general time, meaning “during”
Model: Se puede ver las estrellas por la noche.(One can see the stars during the night.)

Rule: for means of communication or transportation
Model: Prefiero viajar por tren y hablar por teléfono.(I prefer to travel by train and speak by phone.)

Rule: in cases of mistaken identity, or meaning “to be seen as”
Model: Me tienen por loco.(They take me for crazy.)

Rule: to show the reason for an errand (with ir, venir, pasar, mandar, volver, and preguntar)
Model: Paso por ti a las ocho.(I’ll come by for you at eight o’clock.)

Rule: when followed by an infinitive, to express an action that remains to be completed, use por + infinitive
Model: La cena está por cocinar.(Dinner has yet to be cooked.)

Rule: to express cause or reason
Model: El hombre murió por falta de agua.The man died for lack of water.

Rule: “estar por” means to be in the mood, or inclined to do something
Model: Estoy por tomar café.(I’m in the mood for drinking coffee.)

Rule: in passive constructions
Model: El libro fue escrito por Octavio Paz.(The book was written by Octavio Paz.)

“Por” also appears in many idiomatic expressions:
por adelantado,in advance
por ahora,for now
por allí,around there; that way
por amor de Dios,for the love of God
por aquí,around here; this way
por casualidad,by chance
por ciento,percent
por cierto,certainly
por completo,completely
por dentro,inside
por desgracia,unfortunately
por ejemplo,for example
por eso,therefore
por favor,please
por fin,finally
por lo general,generally
por lo visto,apparently
por medio de,by means of
por lo menos,at least
por lo tanto,consequently
por mi parte,as for me
por ningún lado,nowhere
por otra parte,on the other hand
palabra por palabra,word for word
por primera vez,for the first time
por separado,separately
por supuesto,of course
por suerte,fortunately
por todas partes,everywhere
por todos lados,on all sides
por último,finally

“Para” — in contrast, has relatively fewer uses.
Rule: to indicate destination
Model: El hombre salió para Madrid.(The man left for Madrid.)

Rule: to show the use or purpose of a thing
Model: El vaso es para agua.(The glass is for water.)

Rule: to mean “in order to” or “for the purpose of”
Model: Para hacer una paella, primero dore las carnes.To make a paella, first sauté the meats.

Rule: to indicate a recipient
Model: Este regalo es para ti.(This gift is for you.)

Rule: to express a deadline or specific time
Model: Necesito el vestido para el lunes.(I need the dress by Monday.)

Rule: to express a contrast from what is expected
Model: Para un niño lee muy bien.(For a child, he reads very well.)

Rule: “estar para” to express an action that will soon be completed
Model: La chica está para dar a luz.(The girl is about to give birth.)

“Por” and “para” can also be used in questions. “¿Por qué?” means “Why?” (for what reason) while “¿Para qué?” means “Why?” (for what purpose).
¿Por qué estudias español?For what reason do you study Spanish?
Possible answer:
Porque es un requisito.Because it’s required.

¿Para qué estudias español?For what purpose do you study Spanish?
Possible answer:
Para ser profesor de español.In order to become a Spanish teacher.


55.IRREGULAR COMPARATIVES
The following adjectives have irregular forms for the comparative and the superlative:
Adjective: bueno (good)
Comparative: mejor (better)
Superlative: el/la mejor (best)

Adjective: malo (bad)
Comparative: peor (worse)
Superlative: el/la peor (the worst)

Here are two more adjectives with irregular comparatives and superlatives:
Adjective: grande (big)
Comparative: mayor (older; greater)
Superlative: el/la mayor (the oldest; the greatest)

Adjective: pequeño (small)
Comparative: menor (younger; less)
Superlative: el/la menor (youngest; least)

Note that when referring to size, grande and pequeño follow the normal rules for comparative and superlative forms. That is, they do not use the irregular forms menor and mayor.
Esta casa es grande.This house is big.
Esa casa es más grande.That house is bigger.
Aquella casa es la más grande.That house over there is the biggest.

When referring to age, use the irregular forms mayor and menor.
Juan es menor que María.Juan is younger than Maria.
María es la mayor de la familia.Maria is the oldest of the family.

When referring to the concepts “less” or “greater”, use the irregular forms mayor and menor.
El agua es de mayor importancia que la comida.Water is more important than food.
La comida es de menor importancia que el agua.Food is less important than water.

The words joven and viejo are used for non-comparative descriptions of age.
El niño es joven.The boy is young.
El abuelo es viejo.The grandfather is old.


56.DEMONSTRATIVES
este,this
ese,that
aquel,that one over there

Remember that in Spanish, adjectives have four forms: masculine singular, masculine plural, feminine singular, feminine plural.
el chico bajo
los chicos bajos
la chica baja
las chicas bajas

The demonstrative adjectives also have four forms:
este libro (this book)
estos libros (these books)
esta pluma (this pen)
estas plumas (these pens)

ese libro (that book)
esos libros (those books)
esa pluma (that pen)
esas plumas (those pens)

aquel libro (that book over there)
aquellos libros (those books over there)
aquella pluma (that pen over there)
aquellas plumas (those pens over there)

57.TIME EXPRESSIONS WITH "HACER"
Hace + time + que + present tense form of the verb
Hace un año que estudio español.I have been studying Spanish for one year.
Hace dos años que ellas estudian inglés.They have been studying English for two years.

Present tense form of the verb + desde hace + time
Estudio español desde hace un año.I have been studying Spanish for one year.
Ellas estudian inglés desde hace dos años.They have been studying English for two years.


58.POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS
mine
el mío / la mía
los míos / las mías

yours (familiar)
el tuyo / la tuya
los tuyos / las tuyas

yours (formal), his, hers
el suyo / la suya
los suyos / las suyas

ours
el nuestro / la nuestra
los nuestros / las nuestras

yours (familiar)
el vuestro / la vuestra
los vuestros / las vuestras

yours (formal), theirs
el suyo / la suya
los suyos / las suyas

Mi libro es grande.My book is large.
El tuyo es pequeño.Yours is small.
Tu carro es verde.Your car is green.
El mío es rojo.Mine is red.

The definite article is usually omitted when the possessive pronoun comes after the verb ser:
El carro grande es mío.The big car is mine.
El carro pequeño es suyo.The small car is hers.

El suyo, la suya, los suyos, las suyas can be clarified as follows:
El carro grande es de él.The big car is his. (clarified)
La casa pequeña es de ella.The small house is hers. (clarified)


59.REFLEXIVE VERBS
When a verb is reflexive, the infinitive ends in “se.”
lavar:to wash (non-reflexive)
lavarse:to wash oneself (reflexive)
rascar:to scratch (non-reflexive)
rascarse:to scratch oneself (reflexive)

SOME COMMON REFLEXIVE VERBS
Examples of some common reflexive Spanish verbs are below. Click on them to view their correct conjugation using our verb conjugation tool.
Verb	Meaning
Aburrirse	To get bored.
Afeitarse	To shave (oneself).
Bañarse	To take a bath.
Cansarse	To get tired.
Casarse	To get married.
Despertarse	To wake up.
Divertirse	To have fun.
Emborracharse	To get drunk.
Enamorarse	To fall in love.
Graduarse	To graduate.
Levantarse	To get up.
Lavarse	To wash (oneself).
Maquillarse	To put on makeup.
Olvidarse	To forget.
Peinarse	To comb (one’s hair).
Quedarse	To stay (behind).
Vestirse	To get dressed.

60.REFLEXIVE VERBS: PART II
I want to see myself.Me quiero ver.Quiero verme.
John needs to wash his hair.Juan se necesita lavar el pelo.Juan necesita lavarse el pelo.
Maria can wash her face now.Ahora María se puede lavar la cara.Ahora María puede lavarse la cara.

Whenever a verb directly follows a preposition, it remains in the infinitive form. For reflexive verbs,
the ending -se changes to agree with the subject. Observe the differences in the following sentences, all of which are about counting burros before falling asleep.


In Spanish, these intransitive constructions frequently employ the reflexive form.
The sun dried the clothes. (transitive)
El sol secó la ropa.

The clothes dried in the sun. (intransitive)
La ropa se secó al sol.

Sometimes, the reflexive construction is used merely to emphasize who is performing the action of the sentence.
The cake? Maria ate it.
¿La torta? María se la comió.

For some verbs, the meaning changes when they are used reflexively.
aburrir – to bore
aburrirse – to be bored

acordar – to agree
acordarse de – to remember

acostar – to put to bed
acostarse – to go to bed

casar – to perform a marriage ceremony
casarse con – to become married to someone

despedir – to fire
despedirse de – to say goodbye

dormir – to sleep
dormirse – to fall asleep

ir – to go
irse – to go away, to leave

morir – to die (abruptly, as of an accident, war, etc.)
morirse – to die (as from natural causes; also “to die” figuratively)

negar – to deny
negarse a – to refuse

parecer – to seem
parecerse a – to resemble

poner – to put
ponerse – to put on

probar – to try, to taste
probarse – to try on

quitar – to take away
quitarse – to take off

A few verbs are always used reflexively.
arrepentirse (e:ie) – to repent
atreverse a – to dare
darse cuenta de – to realize
jactarse de – to boast
quejarse de – to complain about
suicidarse – to commit suicide


61.THE DEFINITE ARTICLE: PART II
In this lesson, you will learn some additional rules to help you use the definite article correctly.
For example, feminine singular nouns that begin with an emphasized a or ha use the masculine form of the article.
el agua
el hacha
el hambre
el águila

This rule only applies to the singular form of the noun. The plural form uses the feminine article.
el agua,las aguas
el hacha,las hachas
el hambre,las hambres
el águila,las águilas

The definite article is used when talking about a person, but it is not used when talking directly to a person.
El señor Gómez es profesor.
Señor Gómez, ¿es usted profesor?


62.PRETERITE VS IMPERFECT: PART I
Spanish has two past tenses: preterite（过去时） and imperfect（过去进行时）. Most verbs can be put into either tense, depending upon the meaning.
 In this lesson, you will learn to conjugate regular -ar verbs in the preterite and the imperfect.
 You will also learn the basic difference between the preterite and the imperfect, so that you can begin using them correctly.

To conjugate regular -ar verbs in the preterite, simply drop the ending (-ar) and add one of the following:
é
aste
ó
amos
asteis
aron

To conjugate regular -ar verbs in the imperfect, simply drop the ending (-ar) and add one of the following:
aba
abas
aba
ábamos
abais
aban

Compare the verb “hablar” conjugated in the preterite and the imperfect.
Preterite	Imperfect
hablé	hablaba
hablaste	hablabas
habló	hablaba
hablamos	hablábamos
hablasteis	hablabais
hablaron	hablaban

Generally speaking, the preterite is used for actions in the past that are seen as completed. Use of the preterite tense implies that the past action had a definite beginning and definite end.
Juan habló de la una hasta las dos.
Juan spoke from one until two o’clock.(clearly stated beginning and end)

Generally speaking, the imperfect is used for actions in the past that are not seen as completed.
Use of the imperfect tense implies that the past action did not have a definite beginning or a definite end.

Las chicas hablaban en inglés.
The girls used to speak in English.(no definite beginning or end)

You have now learned the basic difference between the preterite and the imperfect:
The preterite tells us specifically when an action took place.
The imperfect tells us in general when an action took place.

63.PRETERITE: PART I

To conjugate regular -ar verbs in the preterite, simply drop the ending (-ar) and add one of the following:
é，aste，ó，amos，asteis，aron

To conjugate regular -er and -ir verbs in the preterite, simply drop the ending (-er or -ir) and add one of the following:
í,iste,ió,imos,isteis,ieron

Here are all three regular preterite verb forms together:
hablar	    comer	    vivir
hablé	    comí	    viví
hablaste	comiste	    viviste
habló	    comió	    vivió
hablamos	comimos	    vivimos
hablasteis	comisteis	vivisteis
hablaron	comieron	vivieron

The preterite is used for actions that can be viewed as single events.
Ella caminó por el parque.She walked through the park.
Ellos llegaron a las ocho.They arrived at eight o’clock.

The preterite is used for actions that were repeated a specific number of times, or occurred during a specific period of time.
Ayer escribí tres cartas.Yesterday I wrote three letters.
Vivimos allí por cuatro años.We lived there for four years.

The preterite is used for actions that were part of a chain of events.
Ella se levantó, se vistió, y salió de la casa.She got up, dressed, and left the house.

The preterite is used to state the beginning or the end of an action.
Empezó a nevar a las ocho de la mañana.It began to snow at eight in the morning.

64.IMPERFECT: PART I
To conjugate regular -ar verbs in the imperfect, simply drop the ending (-ar) and add one of the following:
aba,abas,aba,ábamos,abais,aban

To conjugate regular -er and -ir verbs in the imperfect, simply drop the ending (-er or -ir) and add one of the following:
ía,ías,ía,íamos,íais,ían

Here are all three regular imperfect verb forms together:
hablar	        comer	    vivir
hablaba	        comía	    vivía
hablabas	    comías	    vivías
hablaba	        comía	    vivía
hablábamos	    comíamos	vivíamos
hablabais	    comíais	    vivíais
hablaban	    comían	    vivían

The imperfect is used for actions that were repeated habitually.
Almorzábamos juntos todos los días.We would lunch together every day.
Las señoras siempre charlaban por las mañanas.The ladies would always chat in the mornings.

The imperfect is used for actions that “set the stage” for another action.
Yo leía cuando entró mi papá.I was reading when my papa entered. (note that “entered” is preterite)

The imperfect is used for telling time and stating one’s age.
Eran las siete de la noche.It was seven o’clock at night.
La niña tenía cinco años.The little girl was five years old.


65.PRETERITE: PART II
In this lesson you will learn to conjugate four important verbs in the preterite tense: ser, ir, dar and hacer.
ser	        ir	        dar	    hacer
fui 	    fui	        di	    hice
fuiste	    fuiste	    diste	hiciste
fue	        fue	        dio	    hizo
fuimos	    fuimos	    dimos	hicimos
fuisteis    fuisteis	disteis	hicisteis
fueron	    fueron	    dieron	hicieron
To review some of the rules for using the preterite:
The preterite is used for actions that can be viewed as single events.
The preterite is used for actions that were repeated a specific number of times.
The preterite is used for actions that occurred during a specific period of time.
The preterite is used for actions that were part of a chain of events.
The preterite is used to state the beginning or the end of an action.

66.IMPERFECT: PART II
Remember, the imperfect is used for past actions that are not seen as completed.
Use of the imperfect tense implies that the past action did not have a definite beginning or a definite end. The imperfect tells when — in general, an action occurred.
Good news! There are only three irregular verbs in the imperfect. You must simply memorize them.
ser	        ir	    ver
era	        iba	    veía
eras	    ibas	veías
era	        iba	    veía
éramos	    íbamos	veíamos
erais	    ibais	veíais
eran	    iban	veían
To review some of the rules for using the imperfect:
The imperfect is used for actions that were repeated habitually.
The imperfect is used for actions that “set the stage” for another action.
The imperfect is used for telling time and stating one’s age.

67.PRETERITE VS IMPERFECT: PART II
Some words and phrases indicate specific time frames, and therefore signal the use of the preterite.
ayer(yesterday)
anteayer(the day before yesterday)
anoche(last night)
desde el primer momento(from the first moment)
durante dos siglos(for two centuries)
el otro día(the other day)
en ese momento(at that moment)
entonces(then)
esta mañana(this morning)
esta tarde(this afternoon)
la semana pasada(last week)
el mes pasado(last month)
el año pasado(last year)
hace dos días, años(two days, years ago)
ayer por la mañana(yesterday morning)
ayer por la tarde(yesterday afternoon)

Other words and phrases indicate repetitive, vague or non-specific time frames, and therefore signal the use of the imperfect.
a menudo(often)
a veces(sometimes)
cada día(every day)
cada semana(every week)
cada mes(every month)
cada año(every year)
con frecuencia(frequently)
de vez en cuando(from time to time)
en aquella época(at that time)
frecuentemente(frequently)
generalmente(usually)
muchas veces(many times)
mucho(a lot)
nunca(never)
por un rato(for awhile)
siempre(always)
tantas veces(so many times)
todas las semanas(every week)
todos los días(every day)
todo el tiempo(all the time)
varias veces(several times)


PRETERITE: PART III
-ar and -er verbs that change their stem in the present tense do not change in the preterite. They are conjugated just like other regular preterite verbs.
Present	    Preterite
entender	entender
entiendo	entendí
entiendes	entendiste
entiende	entendió
entendemos	entendimos
entendéis	entendisteis
entienden	entendieron

Present	Preterite
cerrar	cerrar
cierro	cerré
cierras	cerraste
cierra	cerró
cerramos	cerramos
cerráis	cerrasteis
cierran	cerraron

-ir verbs that change their stem in the present tense do change in the preterite, but in a different way. They change e:i and o:u in the third person, singular and plural.
Present	Preterite
preferir	preferir
prefiero	preferí
prefieres	preferiste
prefiere	prefirió
preferimos	preferimos
preferís	preferisteis
prefieren	prefirieron

Present	Preterite
dormir	dormir
duermo	dormí
duermes	dormiste
duerme	durmió
dormimos	dormimos
dormís	dormisteis
duermen	durmieron

69.IMPERFECT: PART III
One way to determine if a verb is actually the imperfect is to try substituting one of the following:
was/were …ing
used to …
would (meaning used to) …

The following examples show how to use this substitution test for the imperfect:
I worked in the agency during the day.
I was working in the agency during the day.

I visited my grandmother every day.
I used to visit my grandmother every day.

Every afternoon I took a nap.
Every afternoon I would take a nap.

One does not normally think of a general mental state or physical sensations as having a definite beginning or end, and so they are usually expressed in the imperfect.
Ramón tenía miedo de hablar en público.
Ramón was afraid to speak in public.

Yo creía que Juan podía hacerlo.
I thought that Juan could do it.

Me gustaba el coche.
I liked the car. (The car was pleasing to me.)

The imperfect is used to describe how things were or what things were like. Use the imperfect when describing the characteristics of people, things or conditions.
Era un muchacho muy inteligente.
He was a very intelligent boy.

Era una señorita muy guapa.
She was a beautiful young lady.

Las ventanas estaban abiertas.
The windows were open.

La casa era blanca.
The house was white.

70.PRETERITE: PART IV
In order to preserve the sound of the infinitive, a number of verbs change orthographically (spelling) in the preterite tense. The following changes occur in the “yo” form only:
Verbs that end in -gar change g to gu
Verbs that end in -car change c to qu
Verbs that end in -zar change z to c

Here are three examples:
yo jugué (jugar)
yo busqué (buscar)
yo almorcé (almorzar)
Some common orthographic changing verbs for the preterite tense in these categories are:

-gar	-car	-zar
cegar	aparcar	almorzar
colgar	buscar	autorizar
jugar	clarificar	cazar
llegar	clasificar	comenzar
pagar	destacar	cruzar
plegar	empacar	empezar
regar	justificar	forzar
rogar	practicar	organizar
tragar	sacar	simbolizar
vagar	tocar	tropezarse


71. Preterite V
The following verbs are irregular in the preterite and must be memorized:
decir	        traer	    ver
dije	        traje	    vi
dijiste	        trajiste	viste
dijo	        trajo	    vio
dijimos	        trajimos	vimos
dijisteis	    trajisteis	visteis
dijeron	        trajeron	vieron

72. Preterite VI
Here are the verbs, along with their corresponding stem changes:
Infinitive	Stem Change
andar	anduv-
estar	estuv-
tener	tuv-
caber	cup-
haber	hub-
poder	pud-
poner	pus-
saber	sup-
hacer	hic-
querer	quis-
venir	vin-

73. Pret. vs Imp. III
Some verbs actually change meaning, depending upon whether they are used in the preterite or the imperfect.
This is not surprising, since the difference in meaning can be traced back to the different way in which these two past tenses are used.
conocer
Conocí a Juan hace cinco años.
I met Juan five years ago.(completed action)

En aquella época conocíamos muy bien la ciudad.
At that time we knew the city very well.(no definite beginning or end)

querer
María quiso comprar la casa.
Maria tried to buy the house.(completed action)
Juan quería comprar la casa.
Juan wanted to buy the house.(no definite beginning or end)

no querer
María no quiso comprar la casa.
Maria refused to buy the house.(completed action)
Juan no quería comprar la casa.
Juan did not want to buy the house.(no definite beginning or end)

saber
María lo supo ayer.
Maria found out yesterday.(completed action)

Juan sabía que María venía.
Juan knew that Maria was coming.(no definite beginning or end)

poder
María pudo levantar la mesa.
Maria succeeded in lifting the table.(completed action)
Juan podía participar en la manifestación.
Juan was able to participate in the demonstration.(no definite beginning or end)

tener
María tuvo una carta de su mamá.
Maria received a letter from her mom.(completed action)
Juan tenía un coche nuevo.
Juan used to have a new car.(no definite beginning or end)

74. Pret. vs Imp. Review
https://studyspanish.com/grammar/lessons/pretimp4
Here are all three regular preterite verb forms together:
hablar	comer	vivir
hablé	comí	viví
hablaste	comiste	viviste
habló	comió	vivió
hablamos	comimos	vivimos
hablasteis	comisteis	vivisteis
hablaron	comieron	vivieron

Here are all three regular imperfect verb forms together:
hablar	comer	vivir
hablaba	comía	vivía
hablabas	comías	vivías
hablaba	comía	vivía
hablábamos	comíamos	vivíamos
hablabais	comíais	vivíais
hablaban	comían	vivían


75."HACE ..." TO MEAN "AGO"
In a previous lesson, you learned to use the verb hacer with the present tense form of a verb to indicate the length of time an action has been taking place:
Hace + time + que + present tense form of the verb
Hace un año que estudio español.I have been studying Spanish for one year.

When the verb is in the preterite tense, a different meaning is conveyed:
Hace + time + que + preterite tense form of the verb
Hace un año que estudié español.I studied Spanish one year ago.

There is another way to convey the same idea:
Preterite tense form of the verb + hace + time
Estudié español hace un año.I studied Spanish one year ago.

Note the differences and similarities:
Hace un año que estudio español.I have been studying Spanish for one year.
Hace un año que estudié español.I studied Spanish one year ago.
Estudié español hace un año.I studied Spanish one year ago.


76.FORMATION OF ADVERBS
Most Spanish adverbs are formed by adding -mente to the feminine singular form of the adjective. This ending corresponds to -ly in English.
Adjective	    Fem. Form	Adverb
claro	        clara	    claramente
constante	    constante	constantemente
difícil	        difícil	    difícilmente

Another way to form an adverb is to use the preposition con + the singular form of the noun.
cuidadoso (carefully)
cuidadosamente or con cuidado

perfecto (perfectly)
perfectamente or con perfección

cariñoso (affectionately)
cariñosamente or con cariño
Some adverbs do not follow any pattern of origination, and must simply be memorized. Here is a list of some common ones:
bastante,quite
demasiado,too
mal,badly
mucho,a lot
muy,very
nunca,never
peor,worse
poco,little
siempre,always
When two adverbs modify the same verb, only the second one uses the -mente ending. Note that the first adverb is the same as the feminine singular form of the adjective.
Juan trabaja lenta y cuidadosamente.Juan works slowly and carefully.
El chico le habló clara y cortésmente.The boy spoke to him clearly and courteously.
El autor escribió rápida y fácilmente.The author wrote quickly and easily.

77.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART I
So far, you have studied verb tenses in the indicative mood. The indicative mood is used to express factual information, certainty, and objectivity.
Usted va al Perú en diciembre.You are going to Peru in December.

The above sentence merely reports the fact that you are going to Peru in December, so the indicative mood is used.
Let’s change the above example slightly:
No dudo que usted va al Perú en diciembre.I don’t doubt that you are going to Peru in December.

In the above sentence, the clause “no dudo” introduces a quality of certainty, — the speaker has no doubt,
so the indicative mood is used in the second clause (va) as well as the first (no dudo).
Let’s make another slight change to our example:
Dudo que usted vaya al Perú en diciembre.I doubt that you are going to Peru in December.


78.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART II
For most verbs, the present subjunctive is formed by following these three steps:
Start with the yo form of the present indicative.
Then drop the -o ending.
Finally, add the following endings:
-ar verbs:
-e, -es, -e, -emos, -éis, -en

-er and -ir verbs:
-a, -as, -a, -amos, -áis, -an

Regular -ar verbs like hablar (yo hablo).
hablo – o = habl
habl + e = hable
habl + es = hables
habl + e = hable
habl + emos = hablemos
habl + éis = habléis
habl + en = hablen

Regular -er verbs like comer (yo como).
como – o = com
com + a = coma
com + as = comas
com + a = coma
com + amos = comamos
com + áis = comáis
com + an = coman

Regular -ir verbs like vivir (yo vivo).
vivo – o = viv
viv + a = viva
viv + as = vivas
viv + a = viva
viv + amos = vivamos
viv + áis = viváis
viv + an = vivan

79.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART III

80.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART IV

81.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART V
Here is a list of common expressions that introduce an aspect of desire to the sentence, and therefore trigger the use of the subjunctive.
esperar que,to wish that …
insistir en que …,to insist that …
mandar que …,to order that …
preferir que …,to prefer that …
prohibir que …,to prohibit that …
querer que …,to want that …
es aconsejable que …,it’s advisable that …
es necesario que …,it’s necessary that …
pedir que …,to ask that …
recomendar que …,to recommend that …
rogar que …,to plead that …
sugerir que …,to suggest that …

Remember, there are also expressions that trigger the use of the indicative mood, since they introduce a quality of certainty or objectivity.
creer que …,to believe that …
no dudar que …,to not doubt that …
estar seguro que …,to be sure that …
no es dudoso que …,it is not doubtful that …
no hay duda que …,there is no doubt that …

82.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART VI
dudar que …to doubt that …
es dudoso que …it is doubtful that …
es improbable que …it’s unlikely that …
es incierto que …it’s uncertain that …
es posible que …it’s possible that …
no creer que …not to believe that …
no es cierto que …it’s not certain that …
no estar convencido de que …to not be convinced that …
no estar seguro de que …to not be sure that …
no parecer que …to not seem that …
no pensar que …to not think that …
no suponer que …to not suppose that …
puede ser que …it may be that …
negar que …to deny that …
no es verdad que …it’s not true that …
no es cierto que …it’s not certain that …
no imaginarse que …to not imagine that …
temer que …to suspect that …

83.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART VII
conviene que …it is advisable that …
es aconsejable que …it is advisable that …
es bueno que …it’s good that …
es difícil que …it’s unlikely that …
es dudoso que …it’s doubtful that …
es fácil que …it’s likely that …
es fantástico que …it’s fantastic that …
es importante que …it’s important that …
es imposible que …it’s impossible that …
es improbable que …it’s unlikely that …
es incierto que …it’s uncertain that …
es increíble que …it’s incredible that …
es (una) lástima que …it’s a shame that …
es malo que …it’s bad that …
es mejor que …it’s better that …
es menester que …it’s necessary that …
es necesario que …it’s necessary that …
es posible que …it’s possible that …
es preciso que …it’s necessary that …
es preferible que …it’s preferable that …
es probable que …it’s likely that …
es raro que …it’s rare that …
es ridículo que …it’s ridiculous that …
es terrible que …it’s terrible that …
más vale que …it’s better that …
ojalá que …if only he would …
puede ser que …it could be that …

84.SUBJUNCTIVE: PART VIII
a menos que …unless …
antes (de) que …before …
con tal (de) que …provided that …
en caso de que …in case …
para que …so that …
sin que …without …

85.RELATIVE PRONOUNS: QUE
One way to view relative pronouns is to recognize that they combine two sentences that share a common noun. In the following example, the common noun is “milk” or “leche.”
¿Dónde está la leche?Where is the milk?
Compraste leche.You bought milk.
¿Dónde está la leche que compraste?Where is the milk that you bought?

Another way to view relative pronouns is to recognize that they are used to introduce a clause that modifies a noun.
In the following example, the clause “I finished last night” modifies the noun “book.”
Terminé el libro anoche.I finished the book last night.
El libro es muy extenso.The book is very long.
El libro que terminé anoche es muy extenso.The book that I finished last night is very long.

The most common relative pronoun, and the one used in the previous two examples is “que”.
 It can be used to refer to both persons and things, in either the subject or the object position. “Que” is the Spanish equivalent of the English words: who, whom, which, and that.
El hombre que es pobre … (person, subject)The man who is poor …
Los libros que son extensos … (thing, subject)The books which are long …
La señorita que conocí … (person, object)The young lady whom I met …
La carta que leíste … (thing, object)The letter that you read …

The relative pronoun is often omitted in English, but it is never omitted in Spanish.
La casa que compramos es nueva.The house (that) we bought is new.
El programa que miraba era cómico.The show (that) I was watching was comical.

86.RELATIVE PRONOUNS: QUIEN
The relative pronoun “quien” is used only to refer to people, and has a plural form “quienes.” (There is no masculine/feminine distinction.)
Mi tío, quien es profesor, viene a visitarme hoy día.My uncle, who is a professor, is coming to visit me today.
La chica, con quien fui al cine, es mi novia.The girl, with whom I went to the movies, is my girlfriend.
Quien estudia bastante, gana buenas notas.He who studies hard earns good grades.

When the relative pronoun refers to a person and is in the direct object position,
either “que” or “a quien” may be used. Each is correct. Notice that the “personal a” is used with “quien” but is not used with “que.”
La señorita que conocí anoche es la hermana de Raquel.
La señorita a quien conocí anoche es la hermana de Raquel.
The young lady whom I met last night is Raquel’s sister.

When the relative pronoun occurs after a preposition and refers to a person, “quien” must be used. After a preposition, “que” is only used to refer to things.
Los chicos, con quienes fuimos a la playa, son nuestros amigos.The boys, with whom we went to the beach, are our friends.
El libro en que pienso es extenso, no es corto.The book I’m thinking of is long, not short.

In English, although it is technically incorrect, common usage often finds a sentence ending in a preposition. Notice that this never occurs in Spanish.
Ella es la señorita en quien estoy pensando.She is the young lady I’m thinking about. / She is the young lady about whom I’m thinking.
Mi padre es la persona a quien envío la carta.My father is the person I’m sending the letter to. / My father is the person to whom I’m sending the letter.


87.RELATIVE PRONOUNS: EL QUE, LA QUE, LOS QUE, LAS QUE, AND LO QUE
The relative pronoun “el que” (and its related forms) is used to refer to both people and things.
 Note that there are four forms to accomodate singular and plural, masculine and feminine: el que, la que, los que, las que.
Mi tía, la que es profesora, viene a visitarme hoy día.My aunt, the one who is a professor, is coming to visit me today.
Las mesas, las que son de plástico, son baratas.The tables, the ones that are made of plastic, are cheap.
Mi tío, el que es taxista, llegará pronto.My uncle, the one who is a taxi driver, will arrive soon.
Mis pantalones, los que son viejos, son muy cómodos.My pants, the ones that are old, are very comfortable.

When the relative pronoun refers to an abstract idea, use “lo que.”
Lo que quieres no existe.That which you want does not exist.
No comprendo lo que ocurre.I do not understand that which is happening.





























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































